The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Personal Problem, by H.
Bedford-Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: A Personal Problem

Author: H. Bedford-Jones

Release Date: February 9, 2022 [eBook #67365]

Language: English

Produced by: Roger Frank. This file was produced from images generously
             made available by The Internet Archive.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PERSONAL PROBLEM ***


                          A Personal Problem
                         By H. Bedford-Jones

“All the island’s up at the commissioner’s to-night—he always gets a
bale of ice up from Auckland on steamer day. You were surprised to
find me here, eh?”

“So-so.” The fat man wiped his face and poured another drink. “You’re
a damned ironic brute, Cranshaw! How was I to know that the John
Smith, our Raratonga agent, was yourself? You have nerve. I always
said you had nerve.”

The long, lean man looked across the table, inspecting his guest
curiously. He had looked forward to the coming of the firm’s junior
partner, but Hobson did not know it.

His thin lips crisped ironically as he squirted soda into his glass.

“Well, what are you going to do about it? Come, Hobson, let’s not
mince words. You had me driven out of Auckland; you took over my stock
in the company; you married Agnes, and you’ve grown fat. I fancy
you’re punished enough—you needn’t look at me like that, man! Avarua
is good enough for me.”

Hobson was indubitably nervous. He had shaven before coming ashore,
but his fat jowl was dusky again. He perspired freely, and as he
mopped his face he shot uneasy glances at the other man from deep-set
black eyes.

An overlarge diamond flashed on his fat hand, and another glittered in
his tie.

“You’re a sly dog, Cranshaw, a sly dog,” he muttered, then his voice
took on vigor. “What do you mean, anyway? You needn’t think that
because your bally bungalow is out here at the edge of town you can
threaten me. I won’t stand for it. I’ll discharge you—I’ll show you up
before the commissioner—”

“Hold on, man! Great Heavens, don’t you see that I’m in your power?”
Cranshaw leaned over the table, his face anxious, pleading.

But behind the anxiety in his gray eyes there was a hard coldness,
quickly veiled.

“I’m not threatening you, Hobson—it’s the other way around. I’m
satisfied, here in Avarua; I’m the company’s agent, no one knows who I
used to be, I’ve a good salary. Come, don’t bear malice! The old life
is forgotten, so let the dead bury their dead. Don’t be hard on me,
old man! I know you didn’t treat me square, but you married Agnes—I
was beaten, and that’s an end to it. Now I’m contented and prospering
here. You won’t give me away, will you? You won’t discharge me, send
me down into hell a second time?”

Hobson took a cheroot from the table and lit it. His flash of
apprehension had vanished altogether.

“No,” he returned slowly, judicially. As he was inspecting the diamond
on his finger he did not notice the hard gray eyes across the table.
“No, Cranshaw. I didn’t treat you right, I’ll admit, but bygones are
bygones. As you say, you’re in my power. I never quite believed you
stole that money myself.”

A burst of terrible irony ripped through the mask of Cranshaw’s lean
face; but it was gone instantly.

Hobson glanced up with complacent, cunning frankness.

“I misunderstood you, I guess,” he went on heavily. “To tell the
truth, I half expected you had got me here to—to—”

He paused, licking his lips. Cranshaw broke out into a loud, ringing
laugh.

“Nonsense, man! Come, drink up and shake hands on it all—if you bear
no malice we’ll cry quits, eh? No, things have turned out for the
best, far as I’m concerned. And so you’ll not bear hard on me, old
man? You’ll just forget who I used to be?”

Hobson’s little leering eyes cleared of their suspicion and something
very like a sigh of relief shook his fat chest. Their glasses clinked
together.

“Here’s how!”

The personal problem, it seemed, was closed finally and forever.

There followed an hour of labor over the table, since it was the
junior partner’s first “whirl around the circuit” of the islands;
previously he had lived a cunning and contented existence in Auckland,
far from savages and resident commissioners.

Cranshaw, however, had looked forward to his coming for some little
time.

“You’d better stay ashore for the night,” stated the resident agent,
when the reports had been cleared up and balanced properly. “There’s
quite a surf running, and it’ll be hard to get a whale boat, since all
the natives are feasting. Steamer day’s a great occasion here, you
know.”

“I’m not fond of insects,” and as Hobson reached for the siphon his
eyes flitted around uneasily. “I’ve heard stories about these
islands.”

“You look apoplectic, too,” mused Cranshaw. For an instant that odd,
bitterly cruel light shot through his gray eyes. “Nonsense, man!
That’s all talk. Of course, there are a few cockroaches and such, but
there’s nothing dangerous. Absolutely no scorpions, and the centipeds
don’t kill. That’s all talk. See here, I’ve two cots laid up in my
sleeping-room—finest mosquito curtains in the island. Better stop, and
it’ll save coming ashore in the morning.”

Hobson glanced through the door that his host flung open, and the
sight of the wide, clean sleeping-room with its two draped beds
evidently decided him.

“All right,” he nodded.

“Better finish this bottle,” suggested Cranshaw easily. He himself
drank little.

“Come out to the steamer to-morrow,” said Hobson, a half hour later,
as they rose. “I’d like to show you—show you Agnes’s picture—an’ the
baby’s.”

“Thanks,” returned Cranshaw.

But his long, lean face seemed to quiver a trifle, and as he ushered
his guest into the sleeping-room his gray eyes were baleful. That
speech had been sheer venom, for Hobson was not drunk; he had merely
forgotten for the moment his intense fear of Cranshaw.

Once ensconced with their mosquito curtains, the two men exchanged a
few words before dropping off to sleep, then the darkness was broken
only by the rasping snore of Hobson.

Curiously enough, Cranshaw’s breathing seemed hardly audible.

For Avarua, the night was a cool one. The bungalow was at the edge of
town, and the roar of the surf thundered dully from the outer reefs in
unbroken cadences.

Suddenly, and without the slightest warning, a horrible scream echoed
out from the veranda—shrilled up and off, and seemed to die softly in
the distance.

“My God!” Hobson’s voice rang out. “What’s that?”

“_Mor kiri-kiri_,” returned Cranshaw sleepily.

“What’s that?”

“A flying fox—for heaven’s sake shut up and go to sleep!”

Cranshaw did not sleep himself, however, for he lay motionless with
his hand on an electric torch, and chuckled slightly as he listened to
the irregular, panting breathing of the other man.

Slowly through the surf-mutter there pierced other sounds—slight,
thin, bird-like sounds, as though innumerable watches were ticking in
the room. Hobson’s breathing sounded rather flurried, and Cranshaw’s
thin lips parted in a grim smile as he stared up into the darkness.

Peculiar though the ticking sounds were, they were presently overborne
by a still more peculiar sound—one which no human brain could define,
without experience.

It was a ghostly tapping, tapping, tapping that seemed to come from
the floor; a clicking, irregular, metallic tapping. It ceased with
uncanny suddenness.

“I say, are you awake?”

Hobson’s voice sounded stifled, hoarse.

“Cranshaw! Wake up!”

“Eh? What’s the matter?” Cranshaw spoke very sleepily, and smiled to
himself.

“There’s something on my curtains!”

“Shake it off and go to sleep.”

A soft flurry of mosquito curtains, a subdued crash, and then a
scuttling and tapping that once more ended abruptly. A gasp from
Hobson.

“I say, the bally thing’s back!” he cried. “For God’s sake help me
out, Cranshaw!”

“It’s only a hermit crab wandered in, you fool. Wait—now take a look
and give him a good fling off.”

Cranshaw’s arm protruded from his curtains, and he snapped the
electric torch. He had no need where to look, for he had been
expecting this visit from the junior partner for some time.

Hobson gripped his curtains in desperate haste and again shook off the
thing that was climbing. He looked out, saw the hideous, bristly
object clatter away on its spider-legs, and fell back with a subdued
groan.

“Damn this place!”

Again silence and darkness fell upon the room, and again the noises of
the night slowly seeped through the surf-thunder.

Outside the veranda the crabs were scuttling and clicking and
rustling, scavenging with resistless vigor and great enthusiasm. A
thin, far burst of song came from the government accommodation house,
where the bulk of the steamer’s passengers were gathered in jovial
celebration.

Then through all the muffled night there again began to pierce that
insistent watch-like ticking. Not as of one watch, but as of a
thousand it was, steady and irregular and very thin. Occasionally a
quite distinct crunch would echo through, as though some one had
stepped on a beetle; only there was no one to step.

Once or twice there came a soft “flop” on the floor; whatever had
fallen must have fallen from the ceiling.

The sounds were not exactly pleasant, especially to a fevered
imagination. They might mean anything from ghosts to dragons.

And over all, slurring the staccato harmony of the ticking, was an
almost inaudible soft scurrying—like innumerable feathers or hairy
legs running about.

It was a weird symphony, a symphony of lesser noises, of louder
silences, a symphony whose eldritch orchestration produced
hideousness.

There was no discord. Over the crescendo and diminuendo of the ticking
swept that soft horror of nearly inaudible sound, shot through by the
louder crunches; there were other sounds also that could not be
defined by human ears, but all blended into a terrible harmony, the
more terrible because produced by darkness and rife with suggestion.

“I say, old man,” Hobson’s voice rose in a thick discord that ruined
the symphonic whispers utterly, “what’s all this bally rustling, eh?”

Cranshaw waited a little, smiling into the blackness, inscrutable.

“I say, Cranshaw! Let’s have a drink, old man!”

“You ’wake again?” Cranshaw’s voice bubbled out sleepily. “What’s the
matter?”

“I want a drink, that’s all,” came the half-shamed answer.

“No more whisky in the house—we finished up the last of it to-night.
Go to sleep and quit your infernal nonsense.”

“You’re sure there’re no poisonous things around?”

Cranshaw did not answer. The other repeated the question, his voice
beginning insensibly to climb with the last words.

This time Cranshaw replied, but took no immediate heed of the question
itself.

“Say, Hobson, I’ve just been thinking about something. You remember
that mess I got into down at Auckland? I heard the other day that it
was you who stole that money yourself. That’s true, isn’t it?”

The other held silence for a moment, until the ghastly symphony
protruded into his brain.

“I—I wanted Agnes,” came the hoarse words.

Cranshaw smiled to himself.

“Thank God you got her, Hobson—since _she_ wanted money, it seems. By
the way, you were quite right in thinking that I got you here to-night
in order to pay you out.”

“Eh? What’s that?”

Hobson’s voice leaped from the darkness, vivid with a horrible fear,
pulsating and lingering under the roof weirdly.

Cranshaw spoke after a moment; his words were cold and sharp and quite
impersonal.

“Hobson, you were a fool to imagine that I would ever forget or
forgive. You had me snared for your own crime; you broke me; you got
the girl I wanted; you became the junior partner in my place. I became
John Smith, came to Raratonga, settled here and waited. I knew you
would come sooner or later.”

He paused, smiling inscrutably at the darkness.

Hobson was breathing stertorously, and there was another and queerer
sound—like a fat man licking his lips in fear. The darkness
intensified everything.

“I was in two minds, Hobson. I had a notion to take you out to the
reefs for a swim. You don’t know it, but there are interesting things
out there in the warm water—bubbly eels, spiny leper-fishes with every
spine deadly poison, sting-rays, devil-fish, plenty, plenty snake and
shark. But I decided against that, for I knew you had imagination. So
I brought you here instead.”

Cranshaw still smiled into the blackness above him, lying motionless
as he talked. He had no need to switch on the light to guess at the
shaking mosquito curtains of the other bed, the pasty-faced man who
clutched at them, the horrible fascination with which Hobson followed
his every word.

“Now, my dear fellow,” he went on, his voice acridly smooth, “I want
you to take a little look around. Then—”

“For God’s sake, Cranshaw!” burst forth the frenzied tones of the
other man, shrill and smitten with hysteria. “I’ll give up
everything—I’ll sign a confession and give you Agnes—I’ll make it all
right if you—”

“Shut your mouth—and _look_!” snapped Cranshaw, and the words fairly
crackled through the room as he shoved his arm and swept the place
with light.

The light was blinding, merciless, leaving every inch of the room
clean-cut and distinct, dislosing the whole fearful secret of the
hidden orchestration.

About the floor and walls and ceiling were poised cockroaches—South
Sea cockroaches, as large as mice or larger, with great waving
feather-feelers. They flitted hither and thither by the hundred—moving
masses of hideousness, making as they went that ticking which
furnished forth the body of the night’s symphony.

And here and there, flashing away from the light more quickly than the
light could follow, or flopping from ceiling to floor as the light
swept up, were things that looked like sausages. Only when they moved,
when the fearsome hidden red legs flashed out in all their horror,
could one recognize centipeds.

Yet these were not the most horrible nor the swiftest.

For heedless of the light, the occasional crunches swept up above the
body of the symphony as the electric ray disclosed the hordes of
cockroaches to their enemies. Great brown shapes darted here and
there, back and forth, by the dozen; huge brown hairy things as large
as a plate—hunting spiders—leaping on their pray, crunching once, and
leaping forward anew.

The room was a wriggling horror in that moment, and when Cranshaw
clicked off the light that triumphant “crunch—crunch—crunch!” was
rising in a finale that drowned out the rest of the symphony—and
shattered suddenly at his voice.

“Better not step out on the floor, Hobson—I saw a couple of those
spiders on your curtains. I’ll take my chances, but you’ll stay here.
If they get under your curtains you’re gone, remember—any one of those
things means certain death. As I say, I’ll take my chances, because
I’m going to leave you here.”

He calmly threw aside his curtains, reached out for his slippers,
dumped the wriggling things out of them, and rose. Seizing a spray at
hand, he sent a shower of boracic acid over the floor and calmly went
to the door.

There he paused, with a cold laugh, to listen to the frenzied cries
and promises and curses and prayers of the man who dared not leave his
cot—and with that Cranshaw slammed the door.

“Damned coward!” he muttered, opening the tantalus on the veranda and
pouring himself a drink. “He’ll be fool enough to believe me, and be
afraid to try rushing from the room—the damned coward! And precisely
at two o’clock apoplexy or heart-failure will take him off, and Agnes
collects the insurance. Well, I’m satisfied to call quits.”

And the soda shot hissing into the glass.

[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the July 11, 1914 issue
of All-Story Cavalier Weekly magazine.]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PERSONAL PROBLEM ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
